Getting ready to adopt a new puppy? This guide will give you
some of the basics to help you prepare for the arrival of and
first few months with your new puppy. These basic training and
socialization tips can be used for puppies as young as eight weeks
old, the earliest age at which most puppies would be adopted into
a new home. If your puppy is slightly older, as long as he is under
six months old, these steps can still be followed. For puppies older
than six months, many of these tips still apply, but you’ll want to
look for older puppy and dog training articles, too.
prepare for
your puppy’s
arrival
Puppy-proof a play area. Puppies will chew everything,
from electrical wires to socks and shoes! You need a secure,
puppy-proof, enclosed area and a crate for those times you
cannot directly supervise your puppy (see Chapter Two for
tips on crate-training). Note that puppies typically are not
housebroken, and should be kept in an area where it is okay
to have accidents.
Establish a daily routine from day one. A puppy feels
secure having dinner, playtime, lessons and walks at the same
time each day. Also, being left alone all day on Monday after
having spent his entire first weekend with you can cause
lots of anxiety! If you do bring him home on a weekend,
get him used to being on his own by leaving him alone for
progressively longer periods of time. Put him in his safe area
and walk out of the room for one or two minutes, and then
come back. Later on, leave the room or the house for five or
ten minutes.  Increase the period of time until you can be
away for an hour or more at a time. Schedule your puppy’s
feedings so that all meals are fed by 5:00 to 6:00 p.m. (if
you go to bed at 11:00 p.m.), so your puppy drinks very little
water after that. Be consistent about your (and your puppy’s)
bedtime and morning wake-up time to help your puppy learn
to “hold it” through the night. Remember, you won’t always
have to be so structured, but the effort you make now to train
your puppy will pay off in the form of a perfectly-behaved
adult dog!
Establish your house rules. If you do not want an adult dog
who gets on the furniture or jumps up on people, do not allow
your puppy on the furniture or to jump up. Once you allow a
behavior, it is very difficult to change it. Ask all visitors (and
family members) to follow your house rules. No matter how
cute it is when he’s tiny, most people do not want their fullgrown
dog jumping on everyone.
Prepare yourself for dealing with crying, whining and
barking. Puppies make noise, just like babies, but there are
ways to guide your puppy through this stage of his life without
establishing permanent bad habits. There are preventive steps
you can take for training your puppy not to cry in his crate
during the night, which we will detail in Chapter Two, but we’ll
mention a key point: The worst thing to do is to let the puppy
cry and bark for a long time, and then go get him out or give
him attention. When you do that, you teach your puppy to
PERSISTENTLY make noise in the crate, because you have
shown him that persistence pays! You don’t want to respond
Being prepared can mean the
difference between getting a
good start or getting started
off on the wrong paw. A puppy
needs a safe, warm environment.
Being raised indoors with as
much human contact as possible
is critical at this stage. Below are
some tips for properly preparing
your home for a new puppy:
to a puppy making noise in the crate, provided you are sure
the puppy’s needs have been met.
Don’t expose puppy to public places until fully
vaccinated. Puppies need a series of DHLPP vaccines,
typically at 8 weeks, 11 weeks, and 14 weeks. One of the P’s in
the DHLPP stands for Parvovirus, or “Parvo” for short. Canine
parvovirus can survive in the environment for months to
years, especially outside of direct sunlight and appears to
be one of the most resistant canine viruses.1
 Your puppy can
step on it, lick his paws, and contract Parvo, which, sadly, can
be fatal. Do not put your puppy down on the ground outside
(on your street, the park, etc.) or inside public places like
vet offices or pet stores. Your enclosed yard, your home, and
your friends’ enclosed yards and homes (if their pets are all
vaccinated and healthy) are the only safe socialization areas
until your puppy is fully vaccinated. Ask your veterinarian for
advice, if you have any doubts.
Socialization during a puppy’s early months is critical.
Time spent with the family means the puppy will become
comfortable with the sights, smells and sounds that people
make, and grow up accustomed to them, rather than afraid of
them. Puppies can usually be left alone in a puppy-safe area
(such as a crate, the kitchen, or a sheltered puppy run) for
one to two hours for every month of age (i.e., a two-month-old
puppy can be alone for two to three hours). Leaving young
puppies alone for too long means they are not being properly
socialized. Try to plan your absences during naptime, or play
with your puppy to tire him out before you leave. Using safe
toys to entertain while you are gone, such as rubber toys
stuffed with goodies, can make time alone easier. Crates can
make being alone less frightening as well, by giving them a
small secure “den” – see Chapter 2 below on crate training.
What’s next?
With the basic guidelines above, you are off to a good start
getting ready for your new puppy! Next, you’ll need to
learn about basic commands, housetraining, teaching bite
inhibition, crate training, and, finally, walking on leash and
exploring the world outside your home (after your puppy is
fully vaccinated). We highly recommend enrolling your puppy
in a puppy socialization class, and then following up with a
good dog obedience class. Dog training and socialization are
an ongoing process throughout a dog’s adolescence, and are
a wonderful way for you and your dog to enjoy time together
and with other dogs.
1. GREENE CE. CANINE VIRAL ENTERITIS. IN: GREENE CE (2012). 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT. 4TH ED. ST. LOUIS,
MISSOURI; ELSEVIER; 67-80.
04
ch. 2
how to crate
train your
puppy
This article is directed at puppies younger than eight months old. If
you have an older puppy or adult dog, you may also find it helpful,
although not all of the information will apply to you.
Crate training your new puppy can be a wonderful way to
help him become housebroken while keeping him (and your
household belongings) safe when you can not supervise him.
If crate-trained in a positive way, most puppies actually enjoy
being crated! Sometimes it takes time for them to get used to
it, but you’ll often find crate-trained puppies choosing to sleep
in their crate even with the door left open.
Most modern dogs still have an inherent “den instinct” which
is why the use of a crate is so effective in housebreaking: they
will try not to soil where they sleep. A puppy mill or puppy
store dog may have lost this instinct because of being forced
to sleep and stand in the same area where they potty, so crate
training will often not work as quickly for them.
The keys to successfully crate-training a happy puppy are
proper crate selection, introduction, and use. We will cover
these important steps in detail below.
Before we jump in, a word of advice: please...never use a crate
to punish. Going in the crate and spending time in the crate
should always be a happy, positive experience for your puppy
(and, hopefully, for you as well)!
How to select a crate
Size: A crate should be large enough so your puppy or
dog can lie down and turn around in a tight circle. If it is
big enough to lie down in, it should be big enough to sit in
without their head hitting the top, too. It is important not
to choose a crate that is too large to provide a cozy “den”
feeling.  If you have a puppy that will grow into a large
dog, I suggest buying a full-size crate that will fit him as an
adult, and using a piece of plywood or other puppy-chew
-safe material to block off a section just big enough for your
puppy’s current size. This can be expanded as the puppy
grows. There are also wire crates sold with interior barriers
that can be moved and then removed to make the space
the right size.
Type: There are many models of crates, including fancy
wooden ones that look like furniture, deluxe steel wire folding
styles, and the molded plastic airplane travel variety. Many
puppies are very strong chewers - pick the model that is safest
for your particular puppy (smaller breeds and serious chewers,
and nervous/anxious puppies may do best in the plastic ones.)
The steel wire strength varies between brands and models.
Wood or wicker is generally not advised for a puppy or dog
who is not already crate trained.
Cost: Crates can cost anywhere from $30 to $200 and up,
depending on the size and durability.
This fits perfectly!
05
Bedding in the crate: Puppies can be amazingly strong
chewers! If you are leaving the puppy unsupervised in the
crate, make sure you use a chew-proof bed (like a metal-frame
hammock bed) or chew-proof crate pad. Your puppy might be
fine with a blanket for weeks and then one day not just chew
it, but eat it! That can be fatal, or require costly and painful
surgery to cut open their intestine to remove a blockage.
Covering the crate: Some puppies feel most secure in a crate
that is dark and cozy, like a den. Do not cover a crate with a
blanket or sheet, even partially. Puppies can pull a blanket into
their crate through even a tiny gap! There are safe ways you
can make your puppy’s crate more den-like, while making sure
they have plenty of air and it stays a comfortable temperature.
For example, you can use thick cardboard or wooden boards,
laying them on the top and leaning them against a few of the
sides - on the outside, out of puppy teeth reach.
Where do you put the crate?
Some people prefer to put the crate where they spend the
most time, like in the kitchen or living room. Smart puppy
owners also have a crate in their own bedroom, right next to
their bed. A new puppy will be happiest and feel safest if he’s
sleeping with his new family like he was when he was sleeping
with his mom and littermates. Some puppies accept that
you’re right there (remember, do not reward or pay attention
to noise) and settle right down. For others, it can take a few
nights… have I mentioned earplugs yet?
Get ready to introduce your puppy
to the crate for the first time
You and your puppy should think of the crate as his special
place where he is safe and happy. Some owners prefer to use
the terms “den” or “house” or whatever helps them to think of it
as a safe, calm place, which helps their puppy feel that way, too.
First, give your puppy a nice long exercise-and-play session,
until he seems tired... or until you are tired! Let him drink at
the end of the play session.
Second, take away all food and water thirty minutes to an
hour prior to crating your puppy, and make that time a quieter
“winding-down” time with you.
Third, take the puppy outside to give him a chance to go to
the bathroom. This is not playtime. Have the puppy on a leash
and walk in small circles, encouraging him with verbal praise
for any sniffing, and use the training word you’ve chosen to
get them to go potty (see Chapter Three for more on that).
If you leave him outside alone, you will not know if the puppy
has gone, and you might miss the all-important chance to
praise the puppy for going to the bathroom outside.
Now you’re ready to introduce the puppy to the crate!
Introduce your puppy to the crate:
first day trial runs
The first day, start with a few trial runs of your puppy going in
the crate. During these short periods of introduction, do not
shut the crate door. How do you get your puppy into the crate?
Ideally, you never force a puppy into a crate. How you get the
puppy into the crate will depend on the age of the puppy.
A very young puppy (three months and under) can usually
just be gently picked up and placed inside, or you can easily
lure him into the crate by tossing in a treat. Give lots of verbal
praise when the puppy is in the crate, saying things like “What
a good puppy in the crate! Good puppy!” Use a calm-buthappy
voice. Even if the puppy leaves right away, quickly say
at least one “Good puppy!”
For puppies four months old and older: first try luring him
inside by throwing in a treat or toy. If the puppy will not go
all the way into the crate, try creating a trail of treats leading
into the back of the crate. If regular treats are not enough of
a lure, you might need to try special treats, such as bits of
hot dog or chicken. If that fails, it may be that your puppy
isn’t hungry enough to be lured, so stop trying and wait a few
hours, withholding treats and food. Then, at feeding time, put
the bowl in the middle of the crate, close the puppy with you
in the room with the crate, and sit and wait. Even one paw in
the crate is a step forward! You should verbally praise this
step. At the next feeding time, again try the trail of treats, and
place the food bowl in the back of the crate, and sit and wait.
At this point you just want to let the puppy go into the crate,
eat, and leave (so do not close the door). Then, in a few hours,
try tossing the treats in again.
Closing the door
Once the puppy goes willingly into the crate for a treat tossed
in (or to get to his food bowl in the back) a few times in a
row, you are then ready to try closing the door for a few short
sessions. Fill a hollow rubber toy with wet and dry dog food
(there are dog toys made especially for this purpose). Let the
puppy smell the food in the toy, and then place the foodstuffed
toy in the back of the crate. Do not use a rawhide or
any other toy he cannot have safely when unsupervised. If the
puppy doesn’t go in to get the toy, toss treats in the crate or
place a few treats in the food bowl in the crate and softly close
the door once he’s inside. Give him lots of praise and then
calmly walk away. I find it best to walk out of the room, but I
leave my door open just a crack so I can secretly look in and
see how the puppy is doing.
If you have a whole day free to devote to crate-training, you
can feed your puppy all of his meals and treats (again, use
the hollow rubber toy) inside the crate, and close the crate
door while he’s eating. So, three times on the first day, you’d
put your puppy into the crate for 10-15 minutes at a time (it
depends on how good a toy-destuffer he is) and then let him
out just a few minutes after he finishes the food in the toy (IF
he is quiet... see the next section!).
Don’t give in to whining or barking
This can be the hardest part of crate training, at least for the
humans involved! However--and this is important--you should
never, ever let your puppy out of the crate when he is whining,
crying or barking. This is crucial, especially in the beginning
stages of training. If you give in to the puppy’s noise and open
the crate, he will learn that all he has to do to get you to open
the crate is make noise, and he will keep trying that technique
if it worked once! If you took your puppy outside to potty,
fed him, and you’ve chosen a safe crate where he cannot get
injured, there is no reason he needs to come out when he is
crying. If you are ready to take the puppy out during one of
your day-one introduction crate sessions, wait until he is quiet!
If you walk towards the crate and he starts barking or loudly
whining, walk away and wait for him to be quiet (which will
usually last only for a few seconds), and then run quickly
to open the door during that quiet moment. Earplugs can
help humans get through this; we know it’s hard to hear your
beloved puppy crying. But remember, you are doing this so
you’ll have a safe place to leave your puppy when you cannot
watch him, and eventually he’ll like it!
06
When to use the crate
This brings us to the subject of when to use the crate. After
the first introduction day, your puppy should take all of his
naps in the crate and sleep there at night. Puppies should
never be crated for more than eight hours at night. During the
day, your puppy can be crated only one hour for each month
he’s been alive (so a two-month-old puppy should only be
crated for two hours at a time without a potty/play break). The
remainder of the time, the puppy should be in the company
of his new owners (on a hard-surface floor until housebroken),
being cuddled, played with, socialized, loved and cared for in
his new home.
How long to crate?
At bedtime on the first night, put the puppy back into the
crate with an indestructible chew toy (I like to use the same
hollow rubber toy that can be stuffed with treats, but use it
empty at bedtime). Since the puppy’s body has yet to learn
to “hold it”, he may only be able to sleep for four or five hours
at a time. Don’t worry--gradually, he’ll be able to sleep longer
and longer, eventually up to eight hours. Puppy bladders and
bowels are just not mature enough to hold it much longer
than that. However, some puppies simply cannot go longer
than two or three hours, even at night, without urinating. If the
puppy has been crated for at least two hours, and is circling
and whimpering, he may have to eliminate. Take him outside,
but keep the session short and quiet. Do not socialize with the
puppy. If he eliminates, give him lots of praise and then take
him right back inside and crate him again; If he doesn’t, no
praise and back into the crate.
Remember, just like with babies, mornings come very early
with young puppies. At around four months of age, the
puppy’s bladder should start to mature and he will start
sleeping longer at night. Just remember: once you have
put the puppy in the crate after a middle of the night potty
break, don’t take him out for least two hours. If you do, you
are teaching him that whimpering will get him what he most
likely was wanting - your company and attention. Your puppy
must learn that nights are for sleeping and his sleeping place
is the crate. Once he learns this lesson - and it usually takes
about two to four nights - he will begin to look at the crate as
his sleeping place. One day you will look for your puppy and
find him curled up in the crate, where he went by himself to
catch a few zzz’s!
Once you have crate-trained your pup, you can use the crate
to keep your house safe from your puppy’s curiosity-chewing,
and your puppy will be safe from the myriad of dangers that
lie waiting for lonely, bored, and curious puppies. Think of it
as a crib or playpen for your baby dog. Keep your home and
your puppy safe - use a crate!
z
z
z
z
z
07
ch. 3
housetraining
your puppy
Young puppies may take several months to become
housebroken. You can help them by:
• Always take your puppy out FIRST THING in the
morning, before you do anything.
• Always take your puppy out FIRST THING after eating a
meal, and after she wakes up from naps.
• Set up a regular schedule of sleeping, eating, and
going outside.
• Set up a “puppy room” or playpen as an area where
the puppy can be safe when unsupervised (until she is
housebroken).
At first, set a timer for 30 minutes, and take your puppy out
each time the bell rings. As she gets older you can increase
the time. You only need to stay outside with her for a few
minutes. Learn to read her body language. Often puppies will
start circling or sniffing around, or holding their tails a certain
way – if you see your puppy doing what she does before she
goes to the bathroom, get her outside FAST! When she finally
goes where you want, it’s party time! Give her lots
of praise and treats!
Praise, not punishment
If she has an accident inside, don’t make a big deal of it.
Puppies will have accidents.  She should be kept in an area
where accidents are okay (like a kitchen or other room with a
hard-surface floor for easy clean-up). Once she discovers
that going inside gets no reaction, but going outside gets
praise and treats, she’ll try to hold out for the better option!
Never yell at your dog or push her nose in her messes, swat
her with a newspaper, or make loud noises with cans/pennies
if she has an accident. She is very young. Human babies don’t
learn to use the toilet until they are two or three years old,
right? Using punishment may well teach your dog not to go
to the bathroom in front of you, which will make taking her on
walks a lengthy and unpleasant process. She may cower and
appear to be “sorry” when you yell, but she’s just reacting to
your yell, not to what she did ten minutes or an hour ago.
Please don’t give your unsupervised puppy full run of the
house or access to a non puppy-proofed room at this young
age. When you can’t watch her, put your puppy in a puppysafe
room, a dog run with shade, water and toys, or crate-train
her (see Chapter 2).
At two, three and even four
months of age, puppies are too
young to completely control
their bladder and bowel habits.
A dog of any age who has not
been housetrained needs time
to physically be able to learn to
“hold it”. Your job is to create
opportunities for your pup to go
in the correct place, get praise
and treats, and repeat this
experience enough times for it
to become habit.
Pick up the puppy’s water and food after 8 PM, and take her
outside to relieve herself just before bedtime. DO NOT let her
loose in the house during the night. She should be confined
either in her puppy-proof room or crate -- see “how long to
crate” in the chapter on crate training above.  
Be sure to clean up the areas in the house where your dog has
already messed. Dogs will mess again if they can smell where
they’ve previously marked...and their noses are very strong.
Use an enzyme-based detergent (like those sold in pet stores
to clean up pet messes), not one that contains ammonia or
vinegar, which reacts with urine and will make it smell more.
Going on command
Select a phrase like “Get Busy” or “Go Potty” that you can use
to tell your dog or puppy to go to the bathroom when and
where you want her to. It’s easy to teach her, but some dogs
take longer than others to understand. Use it just like you use
any verbal command – like “Sit,” you say it before you want
the puppy to do it, and then if she does, give her lots of praise
and treats. It should be said in a happy tone of voice, and
never as a punishment. Also, if you catch the puppy in the act
of “getting busy” in the correct spot, you can say “Get busy!!
Good puppy! Get busy! Good good!!” so she associates that
phrase with what she is doing.
08
ch. 4
puppy
socialization
Below are some very basic guidelines for socializing your
puppy. The overall plan is to slowly introduce your puppy
to noises, people, and places, and to make the experiences
enjoyable. It doesn’t do any good to expose your puppy to,
say, a room full of very loud children who pull on the puppy’s
ears - that’s terrifying, not socializing! As you expose your
puppy to noises, places and people, praise or reward the
puppy for any appropriately friendly response. If your puppy
responds fearfully to anything new, remove your puppy from
the cause but avoid ‘reassuring’ him or her, which is actually
praising the puppy for acting scared. You also want to make
sure to stop any unwanted behavior while you are socializing.
Jumping up, biting, or barking should all be cut short by
ending the socialization, and trying again more slowly and
from further away, working toward being well-behaved in the
situation in which he was previously misbehaving. Practicing
obedience commands while in new situations can keep the
puppy focused on you and the commands, and help avoid
unwanted behaviors.
Keep in mind that until his last series of puppy vaccinations
are complete and effective, your puppy must be kept safely
away from areas where unvaccinated dogs may have roamed.
Typically this is around four months of age, but make sure to
check with your veterinarian. Please don’t take him to parks,
on walks, or allow him to make contact with the ground, other
than in your yard and house, until that time.
Noises: If your puppy lives in a quiet room, set up a CD
player to play normal household noises: doorbells ringing,
vacuum cleaners running, doors slamming, toilets flushing,
music playing, etc. Start out at a low volume and over time
raise it to a real-life level. Bring your puppy to different rooms
so he can hear the noises and acoustics of various spaces.
Take him for a pleasurable ride in the car to expose him to
outdoor sights, sounds and smells. Further widen his horizons
by taking him for an outdoor walk in your arms.
To get your puppy used to seeing new places: Take car
rides (using a crate is best), visit friends, pet supply stores,
and, once vaccinated, parks, beaches, outdoor cafes, the
veterinarian’s waiting room, everywhere and anywhere
dogs are allowed.
To get your puppy used to meeting new people: Aim to
introduce your puppy to at least one new person a day for the
first few weeks. A store clerk, the mailman, your neighbors,
your neighbors’ kids, friends, family, strangers walking down
the street, etc. Encourage petting, and as with noises and
places, praise or reward the puppy for any appropriately
friendly response.
To get your puppy used to meeting other animals:
If you want a dog who is friendly towards other animals,
such as dogs and cats, you’ll need to find a way to regularly
expose your puppy to them. Training class is a great place
to introduce your puppy to other dogs. Puppy-training
classes that allow off-leash socialization are wonderful! When
your puppy is older, obedience training is a good way to
get your puppy to practice focusing on you in a distracting
environment, so you can continue your puppy’s socialization
on into adulthood and new situations.
Cats can help ‘train’ a puppy to keep his nose and teeth to
himself, but you should reinforce the cat’s verbal and physical
cues by using gentle but firm restraint (the leash works well)
coupled with a command like “leave it”. Always reward your
puppy for leaving the cat alone.
To get your puppy comfortable with people around his
food bowl: This technique can be used for puppies - and
dogs of any age that will eat out of your hand safely. Begin by
feeding your puppy a few of his meals one handful at a time,
out of your hand. Next, try putting a handful of food in his
bowl, letting him eat, then putting another handful into the
bowl. In this way, your puppy will associate your hand coming
towards the bowl with a positive thing (more food) not a
negative (the food bowl is going away). Rotate feeding so that
all humans (children included) do this at least once a week.
If your puppy exhibits food bowl guarding (like growling,
body blocking, freezing, etc.), consult a professional trainer.
If you have questions about puppy socialization, consult with
your pet trainer or behaviorist.
Socialization means being
exposed to a variety of people
and situations and becoming
accustomed to them. For young
puppies, the period between
four and twelve weeks of age is
a critical stage for socialization.
Puppies who are not sufficiently
socialized during this time are
very likely to grow up fearful
and unsure of themselves,
people, and their environment.
Since fear is often at the root
of aggressive behavior, proper
puppy socialization is critically
important.
09
ch. 5
teaching
basic
commands
Teaching commands is important to your puppy’s safety, and the act of
training can be a wonderful bonding tool for you and your puppy.  At a
minimum, your puppy should learn to sit, stay, come when called, and (for
older puppies) to walk on a leash. These four basics are essential for keeping
your puppy safe! You can start teaching “come”, “sit”, and “stay” when your
puppy is eight weeks of age.  Here are some tips for effective training:
Try never to repeat a command. Repetition has a dulling
effect. Continuing to give a command (“Sit! Sit! Sit!”) while
your puppy ignores you will teach him that you’ll give him
attention if he does the opposite of what you’re asking.
Say, “Come here!” in a fun, high tone of voice every
time the puppy starts running towards you, and give the
puppy lots of verbal/tummy rubs/food rewards whenever
he comes running to you. Crouching down encourages him
to run to you, too.
Say, “Good sit!” every time the puppy sits for the first
week. Then, begin asking for a sit, and use a treat to lure your
puppy into the correct position, using these steps:  
Yummm...
1. Holding a treat, lure your puppy toward you.  
2. Move the hand holding the treat over the puppy’s head
toward his tail.  
The goal is to get him to look up and back, forcing him into
a sitting position to keep looking at your hand. You can also
use your other hand or a wall to gently stop the puppy from
backing up as you lead the nose up and back. Do not push
down on his behind to ‘make’ him sit. You want to teach him
to sit on his own!
Never use intimidation as a tool. If the puppy does
something undesirable, you can use a calm, firm “no”, but
avoid a harsh tone and never yell or use physical punishment.
Punishment and yelling serve only to make your puppy
afraid of you. Cowering does not mean your puppy ‘knows’ he
did something wrong, he is just reacting to your voice right
at that moment and showing submission. It will not help him
learn the right thing to do. If your puppy is cowering when
you are verbally correcting him, use a softer tone of voice,
and focus on rewarding the positive and avoiding/redirecting
negative behaviors. Or try a method called clicker-training,
which is 100% positive-reinforcement -based, highly effective,
and really fun! You can find all kinds of information about
clicker-training online, and there are also many books written
on the subject.
Be consistent. Always use the same command to elicit the
same result. Don’t use the same word to mean two different
things. When you say “down” do you mean lie down or get off
the counter? When you clap, does that mean “come here” or
“stop chewing on that sofa leg”?
10
ch. 6
teaching
your
puppy bite
inhibition
Teaching bite inhibition is one
of the most important items for
any pup. Mouthing and biting
is a normal part of being a
puppy, but this behavior is not
acceptable in an adult dog.
The pup must be taught to inhibit the force of his biting
behavior so that he develops a “soft mouth”, and then to
inhibit the frequency of his mouthing, so that the adolescent
and adult dog learns never to mouth or bite any person (or
their clothing).
The program outlined below is appropriate for puppies (up to
about 18 weeks, with their first set of teeth) that have not yet
learned to inhibit their playful biting. For this program, it is
important that EVERYONE who interacts with your dog, (i.e.
ALL family members and ALL other people) follows the same
rules. Children should be closely supervised to ensure that
they are following the rules, too. Your puppy must learn that
he should not mouth or bite ANYONE.
This program is broken down into three steps, to be
followed in order:
1. No painful bites
2. No pressure with teeth
3. No mouthing at all
Make sure that everyone who interacts with your dog follows
the rules and that everyone is aware what stage has been
reached. It may be helpful to put a sign up indicating what
stage you are working on so that everyone can be consistent
with your dog.
Puppies normally develop bite inhibition through interaction
with their littermates. When a puppy bites another puppy
too hard, the second puppy will yelp and discontinue playing.
In this way the first puppy learns not to bite so hard. When
you take a puppy from his litter, you must take the place of
littermates, and need to continue the teaching.
Step 1. No painful bites
Humans can act like a littermate to let your puppy know
when he has bitten you too hard. You can yelp in order to
startle him, and then walk away and ignore him for about a
minute. Ignore means no looking at, speaking to, or touching
your dog! If necessary you can leave the room for that minute
(a “time out”) so that he has no chance of play-biting you
while you are ignoring him.
Dogs vary in their general sensitivity and it is important that
you startle your dog appropriately when he bites. If, when you
yelp, your dog immediately comes back to bite you again,
then you are not startling your dog enough: Try a louder yelp
or try shouting “Ouch!” Similarly make sure that you do not
startle your dog too much. If your dog runs away and hides
when you yelp, then you are most likely yelping too loudly;
next time, try a quieter yelp.
Step 2. No pressure with teeth
(gentle mouthing only)
Once your dog has learned that painful bites are unacceptable
and has stopped that behavior, you can progress to training
your dog that any pressure of his teeth against your skin is
unacceptable. Use the same procedure of yelping and then
ignoring for about a minute.
Step 3. No mouthing at all
Once your puppy has learned that he should not exert any
pressure with his teeth against your skin you can progress to
training your dog that ANY mouthing at all is unacceptable.
Depending on the age and temperament of your puppy, the
time it takes to reach step three will vary from a week or two
to a few months. Here are some guidelines to help speed the
process along:
• Never hit your dog (his nose or any other part of him)
in response to his mouthing or play biting! Not only is
this unnecessary, but also it will likely encourage him to
continue biting you, either in play or in self-defense.
• Don’t forget to provide appropriate chew toys and
bones for your dog and praise him for chewing on
these. In this way your dog will learn not only what is
unacceptable, but also what is acceptable in terms of
using his mouth.
• You may find it helpful to use a non-toxic taste deterrent
(available from pet-supply stores) on your hands or
clothing while you are going through this program. First
make sure that the product is actually distasteful to your
dog (some dogs like the taste of taste deterrents). Also,
some use peppers and may sting your skin, so read the
labels carefully.
Once your dog has successfully completed all stages of bite
inhibition you will want ensure that your dog continues to
have good bite inhibition throughout life. Therefore it is a
good idea to handle his mouth daily (open it and touch his
teeth and tongue) and reward him for being gentle.
11
ch. 7
stop
destructive
chewing
There are mild displays of this behavior that are to be
expected, especially in puppies and young or high-energy
dogs - a puppy chewing a shoe, or a dog ripping apart one of
her toys. There are also more extreme levels of this behavior,
where the dog will hurt himself or do serious damage to
doors, walls, furniture, or other household items. Below
is some general advice and common solutions to mild to
moderate destroying and chewing behaviors. We suggest
consulting with a professional dog behaviorist or trainer if
your dog or puppy is doing extensive damage.
How to avoid & stop destructive chewing
1. Physical Exercise. Many dogs and puppies chew because
they are bored and have excess energy and/or anxiety.
Chewing is fun and a stress reliever for them! You can help
eliminate this kind of chewing by giving your puppy more
daily exercise. Just like you would do, build up the length
and difficulty of your dog’s “workout” which can be any kind
of athletic activity - walking, running, hiking, playing ball,
running around the yard with a dog friend. Just keep in mind
that you will need to MAINTAIN the amount of exercise
you give them, pretty much EVERY DAY. Even if its just 10
minutes a day, you’ll need to stick to it. If you take up morning
walks with your dog for a few weeks and then stop, the
chewing will very likely return.
2. Mental Exercise. Exercising a dog’s MIND is just as
important in warding off chewing boredom as physical
exercise. Things like obedience training, learning new
tricks, agility classes, walks in new neighborhoods, visits to
friends house, and joy rides in the car can be very mentally
stimulating for your puppy.
3. Chew toys. Many dogs and puppies chew because it is
an instinctive desire. Giving them something appropriate
and desirable to chew on can eliminate their chewing on
things you don’t want them to! There are many commerciallyproduced
chew toys to choose from - knowing the strength
of your dog’s chewing will help you to pick the correct one.
Hollow, chewable rubber toys which can be stuffed with
food and treats and even frozen can provide many hours of
amusement, as can fun, fillable balls which the pet must roll
around to get the treats out.
4. Redirection. If you catch your dog chewing on something
inappropriate, you can say “no” and offer him one of his chew
toys. It can help to have seven different chew toys, and place
out a “new” toy each day, taking up and putting away the “old”
toy at the end of the day. Dogs just love getting something
“new” – it’s more interesting and therefore it keeps their
attention longer. It may take some trial and error to find a
chew toy that he likes more than what he’s chosen (your table
leg, for example). You can make your household items less
desirable by spraying them with a dog-safe chew deterrent,
keeping the dog out of the area with those items, or covering
the items with tin foil as a temporary solution to get him in
the habit of chewing on his chew toys instead.
Using these four steps should solve most chewing problems
very quickly, and your chewed-up shoes will soon be a thing
of the past.
Puppies and dogs most often
destroy and chew things out of
boredom, frustration or anxiety. 
12
ch. 8
teaching
your dog
recall
First, decide exactly what words you’ll use to call your dog.
Keep it simple, like “Come!” or “Here, girl!” Everyone in your
household should agree on exactly what word or words will
be used. Imagine your dog is somehow running into traffic—
you will need to be able to remember the command word
immediately! Use a whistle only if everyone who will ever be
calling the dog can do the exact SAME whistle, and only if it is
louder than you can yell. Training recall with an actual metal
or plastic whistle works, but chances are you will not have it
handy in an emergency situation. For that reason, I prefer to
use the human voice.
To teach your recall word, start out by saying it in an upbeatbut-confident
tone. Try not to use a high-pitched inviting-toplay
tone. Remember, if your puppy is running into traffic,
your tone is NOT going to be fun and high pitched!
Tip #1: If you have already tried to get your dog to come with
you using the word “come” more than a few times and it hasn’t
been working, PICK A NEW WORD before starting this
training! “Treat”, “Front”, “Here”, or “Cookie” are some ideas.
Once you have her completely trained to recall for the new
word, you can add in the word “come”, (“Treat come!”) and
then eventually go back to just “Come.”
Next, find something your dog really likes to use as a lure
and a reward. Treats are the easiest, but some dogs are
disinterested in treats. You may have to try many kinds of
treats to find one that she really, really likes. Or try doing the
exercises below at mealtime, carrying her food bowl. Doing
these exercises right before a meal is very effective! Some
dogs really do prefer verbal praise or a toy to a treat. If your
dog is not interested in any treats you try, nor in praise or
toys, you may need the help of a trainer or behaviorist to work
on finding a highly motivating reward before you work on
training recall.
For our treat-loving friends, divide up the treats (or their meal)
into 10 or 15 portions or pieces. Start by just feeding the dog a
few treats out of your hand and praising her. Then take a step
backwards and show her the treat, encouraging her to take a
step forward to get the treat. The first day, just repeat the onestep-and-treat
10 times. Move around as you walk backwards
for those ten steps, rewarding each step towards you!
The next day, as you step back, incorporate your chosen recall
word (we are going to use “come” for the rest of our example)
and reinforce the treat-giving with verbal praise. So, you take
a step back at the same time you say “come,” show the dog
the treat to lure her to take a step towards you, and reward
the step with a treat and a “good dog.” Repeat this exercise
around your home and yard where she is comfortable. Do this
for a few days, once or twice a day. You can also reach down
to touch the dog’s collar too, so she’ll get used to you securing
her (either for safety, in an emergency, or to attach her leash
before a walk). Then you can start taking more than one step
backwards before feeding the dog the treat. So step-step
“come,” stop, treat, “good dog.” Step-step, “come”, stop, treat,
“good dog.” On the next day, increase the number of steps.
Recall is when your dog or puppy
comes to you when called. It is one
of the most important things you
can teach your dog. Even if your
dog obeys nothing else, having her
come to you when called can save
her life or avoid a dog fight or other
dangerous situation.
When your dog is following you around attentively, waiting
for the treats, you are ready to move on to training recall when
her attention is not on you. Do a few rounds of normal recall
exercises, giving her treats to reward her success. Then, stop
and do something boring to the dog, as if the session were
over, but only do it long enough for the dog to get a few feet
away from you. Then give your “come” command, and have
the treat or reward ready for when she does! Gradually over
the next week, lengthen the times you are doing something
boring, getting farther and farther away from your dog. You
can also randomly reward her “coming” to you throughout
the day too, repeating the command as she approaches and
then giving her a treat. If she’s involved with something really
interesting, like watching a squirrel in a tree or playing with a
toy, and you get her to come on command, make the reward
REALLY big, with lots of treats and praise.
Now you are ready to increase the distractions by going
outside! You can practice “come” with a 10-foot leash attached
to her collar (NEVER off leash until totally trained) outside
your home, or even on a 6-foot lead out on a walk, anywhere
you might be going with your dog.
Try to do the first few sessions outside your home in a lowexcitement
area, such as on your block where you walk all the
time, and then graduate to areas with more going on, such
as a park or other places with lots of people and other dogs.
You don’t want to make the whole outing be about recall,
or it will become repetitive and boring. Limit yourself to a
maximum of three recall exercises per outing. Begin the
verbal praise with her first step towards you, and give the
‘payoff’ treat reward when she reaches you.
Tip # 2: Do not use your command word unless you can
ensure your dog will obey. For example, if you tell your dog
to “Come!” in a real-life situation (not while training) and she
does not come, do not repeat yourself. Instead go and get
your dog, and go back to positively reinforcing her training
in less challenging situations.
It can take many weeks of practice to train your dog to come
to you around multiple or very compelling distractions.
Remember, practice makes perfect, and a solid recall makes
it possible for you and your dog to safely enjoy many more
activities and a richer life together.
13
ch. 9
teach your
puppy to walk
on leash
In this section, we’ll cover the basics of teaching most dogs
and puppies how to walk next to you, following at your side
without pulling. This technique is for dogs who aren’t too shy
or too hyper (if you have a very shy or hyper dog, consult a
trainer). This step-by-step technique is written to be as easyto-follow
as possible, so you and your dog can be happily
walking on-leash together very soon!
This technique is one way I leash-train my foster puppies
and dogs who are interested in food or treats. Keep in mind
that “treats” can be pet food treats, but also verbal “treats” (i.e.
verbal praise), and/or playing with a highly valued toy.
Some puppies/dogs pick up walking on-leash really quickly.
This chapter explains a slower schedule (about two weeks long)
for pups that might need a bit more patience in learning to walk
next to you on leash without pulling. So it’s easier to follow, for
the exercises below, we’ll call your puppy/dog “Rover”.
1. Get rover used to dragging a
short lead around
Don’t hold on to the leash; just attach it to his collar and
supervise him (safely indoors or in your fenced yard, of
course). I use a 4-foot length of lightweight cotton rope (so
there’s no leash handle to get caught on things), soaked in a
commercially available foul-tasting solution that discourages
chewing. Tie or clip it to Rover’s collar, and immediately start
a game with a toy, feed him treats, and/or work on teaching
“sit” and “come” while you walk around to make “leash time”
fun, and to distract him from the new sensation of the rope
dragging on his collar.
Do about 5 sessions a day, each 5 minutes long, for about 5
days. This works best in a place that Rover is used to, like his
own fenced yard or kitchen, so he is focusing on you, not on
new interesting smells.
Trainer’s Tip #1: Our trainer highly recommends not using
“retractable” extending leashes for teaching any sort of leash
skills. The changing leash lengths will often teach unskilled
leash walkers to pull to get more slack!
2. Get Rover used to someone holding
the end of the lead
After 5 days of playing and ignoring the rope dragging, pick
up and hold the end of the rope while you do more 5-daily
Puppies and dogs don’t
automatically know how to walk
politely on a leash; you need to
train them to do so. Properly
leash-training a puppy or dog
takes a lot more than just clipping
a lead to their collar or harness
and expecting they’ll follow you
as you walk (this comes as a
surprise to many new dog and
puppy owners). Puppies may
just sit there as you pull on them,
looking confused, or may take off
after an interesting sight or smell,
pulling you along behind them.
This doesn’t have to happen!
5-minute play/training sessions. Try your best to NOT PULL
ON THE LEAD! So sometimes he’ll be following you, other
times you’ll be following him. Do this for another few days.
3. Teach Rover that tiny tugs on the
rope mean come towards you
Try this on yourself... if someone pulls steadily on your arm,
what is your natural reaction? To pull away from them! This is
the same for puppies and dogs. So use tiny tugs, not a steady
pull. I like teaching a word for this, and I use “here”... I find
this blends well into “heel” later if you’d rather use that word
for the command to walk next to you without pulling. These
sessions I make shorter, about 2 minutes. You can add them
on to the end of your #2 exercise after a day or two of those.
While Rover is on a slack lead, give a tiny tug (think of
someone tapping you on the shoulder to get your attention)
and immediately say “here” and then TURN YOUR BODY
AWAY while you reward him with a treat, so you are not
directly facing Rover. Think about this: if you are out walking
with your dog on leash, are you facing your dog head on? No,
you will be walking along with Rover beside you or a little
behind you, and when you want to go a new direction, when
you step away, Rover may feel a tug on the leash as you are
not facing him.
Rover doesn’t even have to move towards you at first. Think of it
like “Hey, (tiny tug) look HERE I have a treat for you in my hand
next to my leg!” Also, by immediately, I mean right after each
other, it’s like a tug-“here!”. Timing in training is so important!
Over the next few sessions or possibly sooner, you will see Rover
quickly associate a tiny tug with a treat, and at the tug, will look
up at your treat hand and even move towards it.
4. Get Rover to follow you after a tug
Now you can add a small step away from Rover in between the
tug and treat. Take a small enough step so the leash is still slack
after the step. So... tug-“here!”, step, treat. Look mostly where
you are going, not at Rover. You are luring him to follow you.
After Rover moves towards you one step, next time add another
step away... tug-“here!”, step, step, treat. Rover eventually will
be following right along next to you, anticipating that treat!
HOORAY! YOU TAUGHT HIM TO WALK ON LEASH! Now
you just need to cement that behavior for longer durations and
in new places, so keep reading.
14
Walk around doing this exercise, staring with 2-minute
sessions, gradually adding more steps between treats and
lengthening the sessions up to 5 minutes. If Rover loses
interest because of too many steps (or he’s full of treats), stop
the session for at least a few hours until he’s hungry again, or
until the next day.
5. Get Rover to walk on-leash in
other places
It’s one thing for Rover to walk on-leash next to you around
your kitchen or yard, and quite another out in the “real world”
with new exciting/scary distracting sights, sounds and most
importantly for a dog - smells! Gradually try one new location
at a time. During the first few sessions in a new place, do your
best to have Rover really hungry so he’s more likely to focus
on you and your treats, like first thing in the morning before
his breakfast.
Trainer’s Tip #2: Dogs don’t generalize well, so be patient
if it seems like Rover totally forgot how to leash walk! He
didn’t, he just needs to set the behavior in a new environment
and you’re there to help him with that. Patience and gentle,
positive energy will help him realize he can walk on-leash
just as he did in his kitchen, but now in this new, awesome
environment. Be prepared with higher-value treats (meaning
something he’ll go crazy for) as you move to the outdoors. The
greater the distractions, the greater the rewards should be.
The first new area could be your front yard, or a short stretch
of sidewalk right in front of your house. Repeat steps 3 and 4
until he is walking and following you. You can also add other
training exercises (like sit, come, etc) while in that new area.
This might take a number of sessions/days.
Try to pick a quiet time for the new area when you’ll be less
likely to have people or other dogs adding to the distractions.
You might want to start off by letting him have a minute of
‘free time’ while on leash but not focusing on you, to smell the
entire new area before you start “work”.
Trainer’s Tip #3: Plan a few “free time” sessions (at times
YOU decide) during your walks when he can just relax, be
a dog, sniff and engage in silliness! That way he won’t try to
force those times himself. Use a command word to signal the
start of the free time like “free” or “sniff and then when free
time is done, another word to start walking again, like
“walk” or “let’s go!”
Don’t let Rover pull you around! If he starts pulling, get him
to refocus on you. If he won’t refocus, take a step back to the
kitchen/yard and do another few days of reinforcement, then
try the new area again. Teach him that he can only sniff and
explore if he’s NOT pulling on the leash. You will have to be
the judge, and the positive, patient leader.
Soon you will be walking along with Rover happily next to you
on his leash, wherever you want to go!
Trainer’s Tip #4: Once Rover is walking with you on-leash,
you can start paring down the treats. Sometimes he gets one
for walking on leash next to you, sometimes he doesn’t. This
selective reinforcement will keep him interested, just in case
he’s about to get a treat. It’s kind of like humans when we
play slot machines—we keep feeding those dollars into the
machine, even though we only occasionally get money back!
Is it time
for a walk?
15
ch. 10
introducing
your puppy to
adult dogs
Many people think getting or visiting a puppy will ‘liven
up’ their older dog. Most older or calm/quiet dogs are quite
content as they are and may be intolerant and very unhappy
with a puppy’s boisterous behavior. In multi-dog households,
a new puppy can throw off the balance and everyone might
need some reminding of his or her training. The best
match for your dog is usually another dog with a similar
temperament and energy level, but if you do end up with a
puppy and older dog, here are some suggestions to get their
relationship off to the best start!
Get ready
Make sure your dog(s) are current on all their vaccinations,
including bordetella (kennel cough), especially if the puppy
is coming from a shelter or rescue kennel, or has been
exposed to other dogs within the last 2 weeks that were
from a kennel. Get your veterinarian’s recommendation on
whether total separation (quarantine) is needed and for how
long. There are many potentially fatal diseases that puppies
can be ‘incubating’ that will not appear for up to two weeks.
Also, treat your current dogs for fleas and other parasites as
recommended by your vet.
Total separation
Just having the new puppy in the house is enough for your
older dog to get used to, without having to deal with the
puppy jumping all over him and his toys, bed etc. Try to have
the puppy’s starter room be one that your adult dog does
not use for sleeping or eating and one that is puppy-proof
(bathrooms work well), or use a crate. Feed, play and train the
puppy separately, giving equal time to both dogs. Depending
on your adult dog’s reaction, the total separation period could
be an hour, or a week, or more. You want your adult dog to be
able to be right next to the puppy in the crate, or on the other
side of a screen door or baby gate, and the adult dog should
eventually be calm and disinterested.
First introduction
Ideally, the first introduction should be on neutral and
unfamiliar territory, such as a street or park you don’t usually
visit. But if the puppy has not completed his vaccinations ask
a friend if you can use their yard.
If you have a dog that is aggressive towards people or pets
while on-leash, start with short sessions with the on-leash
aggressive dog on a leash just far away enough from the
Note: This technique is for
introducing your puppy to DOGFRIENDLY
adult dogs. If you do
not know if the adult dog is good
with other dogs, or if the adult
dog has ever shown aggression
to another dog (growling,
snarling, barking), please do the
introduction with a trainer or
behaviorist present.
puppy so they do not react (if in a yard, the yard needs to be
big enough that they can be far away enough to be nonreactive).
This could be three ten-minute sessions a day, or as
many as you have time for. Put their leashes on, bring them
outside one a at time, then work on practicing their training
commands to keep their focus on you, keeping them far
enough apart so they do not react.
If you do not have a helper to hold one of the dog’s leashes,
use a tie down. Make sure it is a VERY secure tie-down, not
just a chair leg! You can use a long, strong leash run through
enough cinderblocks that your dog cannot move them with
all his strength. Test your tie down first by bringing your crate
outside. Put the puppy in the crate, then bring out your dog on
leash and attach him to the tie-down. You may want to use a tie
down even if you have a helper: Many leash-aggressive dogs
will react much less strongly (even not at all) when there is not
a person holding their leash. Also, using a harness instead of
clipping the leash to the collar can be a huge help, as pressure
on their neck can intensify an aggressive response.
If you have more than one dog already at home, introduce
them to the puppy one at a time. Start with the most friendly
and submissive of your dogs.
For a really young puppy (4 months and under): start by
having a friend hold the end of your adult dog’s leash, just
following your dog around without pulling on the leash. You
(or the adult dog’s primary caregiver) should hold the puppy
in your arms and bring her over to the adult dog. Squat down,
holding the puppy in your arms and let your friendly adult
dog take a good sniff of the puppy’s back end. Try to hold the
puppy lower than the adult dog. Make sure the leash on your
adult dog is slack, but that the person holding it is ready to
pull back immediately if the adult dog attacks. If you have
done the complete-separation step, there is very little chance
of this happening, but any tension on the collar or leash will
transmit to the adult dog, and make him tense. You want a
relaxed introduction!
Then, call the adult dog away (do not pull him away),
and put the puppy down, holding the puppy on his leash.
Allow the adult dog to approach at his own speed. Verbal
encouragement, such as “good dogs!” reinforces good
behavior and interaction between the two.
If the adult dog wants to stay away from the puppy, do not
“force” him to say hello. If the adult dog approaches, and 
16
the puppy jumps on him (which is typical puppy behavior),
gently but firmly guide the puppy down on all four paws. If
your adult dog growls when jumped on, that is usually an
acceptable “correction” for him to give the puppy, but if he
snarls, lunges, or snaps, you can correct your adult dog’s
overreaction with verbal correction that is appropriate for the
severity of the overreaction (see “Allowable Behaviors” below).
You need to show your adult dog that you are in control of the
puppy, and also in control of him, the adult. Often the adult
dog ignores the puppy, and you can allow the puppy to follow
the adult dog around, sniffing, as long as the puppy is not
bothering him.
If your adult dog shows aggression and will not back down
at your command, you may need to do a slower introduction,
such as walks around the neighborhood together, with the
puppy walking behind (not able to touch) the adult dog. If the
aggression continues, consult a behaviorist or trainer. If all
goes well, allow the dogs to spend five or ten minutes together
and then proceed to the next step.
Short sessions
Going on walks together is the best bonding technique! Even
one or two walks a day provides enough time together for the
first week. If all goes well, you can progress to supervised offleash
access to one another, ideally after a big walk together,
when both will be more relaxed after the exercise. Pick the
largest play area possible so the dogs have room to move
around. Remove all toys from the mutual play area to avoid
possible fights over toys. End the play session if the older
dog repeatedly exhibits ‘lay off me’ behavior such as trying to
avoid the puppy, showing teeth, growling, air snapping at the
puppy or, of course, higher levels of aggression.
Allowable behaviors
Especially before the age of 4 months, or if they have not
been around other dogs, puppies may not recognize subtle
body language signals from adult dogs that they have ‘had
enough’. Well-socialized adult dogs with good temperaments
can set limits with puppies with a growl or lip curl. These
behaviors should be allowed, within reason - once or twice is
okay, especially if the puppy “learns” and stops the behavior.
Do NOT correct an adult dog that is showing “correct” backoff
signals, but do step in to stop the reason for them: don’t
allow your puppy to continue to harass your adult dog with
too-rough or unwanted play. Step in and redirect your puppy’s
teeth onto a toy and get him to play with you instead, or end
the play session completely.
For the most part, dogs adjust to puppies over time, but since
the consequences of a problem can be severe, it is wise to
follow a slow introduction process as outlined above to ensure
all goes well with adding a new puppy to your home.
Grrrrrr!
Let’s play!
Help
 me!
17
ch. 11
puppies
and young
children
Bringing home your new dog or puppy is so exciting! Your
kids probably can’t wait to meet your new pup. Ideally, you’d
wait until your puppy has learned basic commands (see
Chapter 5) and bite inhibition (see Chapter 6) before having
her meet children. We do understand that’s not always
possible! Every puppy and child is different in how they
will react to each other. Assessing your new puppy and the
children she’s going to meet, then planning how the meeting
will occur, can be the difference between the start of a
beautiful friendship or a bad first impression that may be hard
to overcome. Here are some tips to help you get your young
folks, both four-legged and two-legged, off to a good start.
Very young puppies
Younger puppies, like those under 5 months of age, do not
have the mental and physical maturity to be able to refrain
from jumping on, scratching, biting, or knocking over a
small child in their playful enthusiasm. That’s how puppies
are supposed to play with their littermates, and they must
be taught by their human parent not to play like that with
humans of any size. Though a puppy’s adult teeth start
coming in around 4 to 5 months of age, puppy teething can
last up through 7 months of age. Teething is your puppy’s way
of exploring her world with her mouth and teeth. Puppies’
baby teeth are like sharp needles, and they can hurt! They can
also do serious damage to a baby or child’s soft skin.
The safest way for a very young puppy and young child to
meet is when both are supervised and guided. Set up the time
for their first meeting when the puppy is tired, like after a big
play session. The puppy should be held by an adult, or should
be inside a puppy play pen or behind a baby gate. The adult
should model for the child how to gently pet the puppy on the
puppy’s back. If the puppy is sleepy, the adult and child can
snuggle together with the puppy sitting on the floor. Young
children should not be allowed to pick up or carry puppies.
Special care should be taken especially with small breeds, as
puppies can be accidentally-but-fatally harmed if a young
child drops them.
Older puppies
Older puppies may already have had some experience with
children. Many puppies view young children, who often
make high pitched loud noises and fast movents, as
fantastic squeaky toys! Or they might see them as terrifying
unpredictable creatures that may have unintentionally
pinched or pulled an ear or tail. It’s important that your
puppy’s first meeting with your child be a positive experience
to help him overcome any previous negative experiences
with other kids.
If your puppy is trained to walk on a leash, that can be a great
place for an older puppy and child to meet – out on a walk.
You can use two leashes, and let the child hold one of them so
they feel like they’re helping and involved in the puppy’s care.
A leash will also give you some control if the puppy jumps on
the child. You can bring a toy along too, if the puppy playbites.
See the next paragraph for more on…
Jumping and biting
Puppies of any age should not be allowed to jump on or put
their teeth on a child, ever. But you certainly don’t want to
punish a puppy for being a puppy! Gently but firmly move the
puppy away from the child, and redirect the puppy’s attention
to a toy. If the child is old enough to understand, explain that
if the puppy jumps on him, he should be “boring like a tree”,
which means he should stop what he’s doing and stand still
with his arms at his sides. If the puppy bites him, he can say
“ouch!” and put a toy in the puppy’s mouth instead.
Food
Until your puppy is reliably taking treats as gently as a feather
from your fingers, and has been food-bowl socialized, do not
allow children near your unrestrained puppy with food. Even
very young puppies can be possessive of food in their bowls,
or can snatch that ice cream cone from a child’s hand, held
right at puppy-nose height!
As the months go by and your puppy and your child both
mature, you can engage them in activities such as going
on walks together, playing fetch together, and if possible,
attending obedience training classes together. While having
your human and canine kids grow up together is wonderful,
careful consideration of what both parties are capable of,
managing your expectations, and careful monitoring of
interactions as they grow up together will make for a loving
family memories for a lifetime.
Combining the cuteness of puppies
and kids seems like an ideal match!
However, the reality is that it takes
a lot of knowledge, training (of both
the young canines and humans),
patience, and constant supervision
to teach puppies and dogs to
interact safely with young children. 
18
ch. 12
common
items
poisonous to
puppies
People food
People food can seriously harm our furry friends, and
accounted for more than 15,000 pet poisoning cases reported
to the ASPCA Poison Center in just one year! Just because
your dog or puppy ate one of these items once and was OK
does not mean they will be OK the next time -- depending
on the season, fruit ripeness, and other variable factors, the
levels of toxins can vary, as well as your pet’s resistance when
ingesting them. Better safe than sorry, don’t let your pet have
access or eat any of these items:
If your puppy ingests any of the items
below, call or take him to your vet
immediately. Some can be fatal if not
treated as soon as possible. Keep all
these items completely locked away
out of dog and puppy reach.
• Alcoholic beverages
• Avocado (the toxin is thought to be in the plant’s
leaves, bark, pits and skin)
• Chocolate (all forms)
• Coffee (all forms)
• Fatty foods
• Macadamia nuts (this nut can cause temporary
weakness in a pet’s hind legs)
• Moldy or spoiled foods
• Onions, onion powder
• Raisins and grapes
• Salt
• Yeast dough (raw because it expands in stomach)
• Garlic, garlic powder
• Products sweetened with xylitol (i.e. chewing
gum or mints)
Common household and yard poisons
• Animal toxins: ingested toads, insects, spiders, snakes
and scorpions
• Blue-green algae in ponds
• Citronella candles
• Cocoa mulch
• Compost piles
• Fertilizers
• Many household and yard insecticides
• Many indoor and outdoor plants and trees
• Plant bulbs
• Swimming-pool treatment supplies
• Fly baits, especially those containing methomyl
• Slug and snail baits, especially those containing
metaldehyde
• Peeling paint
Medications
These are just some examples of common human medications
that can be potentially lethal to pets, even in small doses:
• Pain killers (including Advil®, Tylenol®, etc.)
• Cold medicines
• Anti-cancer drugs
• Antidepressants
• Vitamins
• Diet pills
Common household hazards
• Antifreeze (REALLY DANGEROUS BECAUSE IT IS
SWEET TASTING)
• Liquid potpourri
• Some ice melting products
• Rat and mouse poison
• Fabric softener sheets
• Mothballs
• Post-1982 pennies (due to high concentration of zinc)
• Cocoa garden mulch
Holiday hazards
• Christmas tree water (may contain fertilizer, pesticides,
fire retardants or bacteria)
• Electrical cords
• Ribbons or tinsel (can cause intestinal obstruction
requiring surgery)
• Batteries
• Glass ornaments
19
ch. 13
puppy
supply list
1. Crate (strong wire or molded plastic airline style) or
metal playpen. See chapter on Crate Training above for
proper sizing.
2. Chew-proof bed that will fit in crate (like the plastic or
metal tube frame hammock-style beds)
3. Chew-proof water bowl & food bowl
4. Food: premium-brand puppy food, including canned
food for toy stuffing
5. Treats for training
6. Puppy-proof chew toys, like hollow ones that can be
stuffed with food
7. Collar, ID tag, & microchip
8. Thick leash (so puppy can’t chew through quickly)
soaked in…
9. Puppy anti-chew spray
10. Biodegradable poop pickup bags
11. Flea and tick control from your vet
Optional items:
1. Baby gate(s)
2. Enzyme pet clean-up product
3. Newspapers or Puppy Training Pads 
20
ch. 14
your puppy
becomes
an adult
However, certain breeds of dogs are not finished growing
or developing at two years old. It’s important to note that
adulthood in your dog is not a pre-defined age necessarily but
rather a marker of how they begin to act. In general, smallbreed
dogs tend to become adults at around two years old.
In large-breed dogs, adulthood might set in closer to three
years of age. However, again, it depends not only on the breed
of dog but also on the inherent personality. For many dogs,
they might seem never to really grow up! Labrador Retrievers,
German Shorthair Pointers, and Pit bulls (and mixes) are just
some of the many breeds we love that can seem like playful
puppies for their entire lives.
Adulthood will be a wonderful, and hopefully long, time in
your dog’s life. Please remember that all puppies grow up to
be adult dogs – they do not stay little puppies forever. The
puppy you adopt and bring home will be a part of your life
for many years, and it’s important to realize that he or she will
A dog is considered a puppy until about 12 months of age. After 12
months they are considered young adult dogs until around two years
old, when they officially become adults!
grow up and go from being a puppy to being an adult. As
adult dogs, they still have many years of companionship to
offer and joy to bring to a home, and they are still just as cute
and loving! When adopting, it is essential to know that you’re
committing to a lifetime with a dog, from puppyhood, to
adulthood, and through their senior years. Senior dogs make
incredibly loyal and easy pets, so loving your dog throughout
his or her entire lifespan is key. Dogs need love through their
golden years, just as humans do, so please commit to loving
your dog, when he or she is a playful pup and when he or she
has some gray around the muzzle, too.
And if you’re thinking of adopting another dog too, consider
adopting an adult dog, especially when adopting a puppy!
A well-socialized and already-trained young adult dog makes
a wonderful teacher for your puppy, and you will save two
lives instead of one.
I love my person
Disclaimer: Information contained in this manual is
our friendly advice for getting along with your new pet!
Our lawyers asked us to let you know it is not provided as
professional or legal advice on specific situations. Though
we have lots of experience and the best intentions, Adopta-Pet.com
cannot accept any responsibility for any injury or
damage that you may cause yourself, your pet, or property
by following our advice. As much as we’d like to be there
to help you in person, Adopt-a-Pet.com has no control over
your use of the information and advice provided by Adopta-Pet.com.
Here’s some more important stuff we need to
say... All information in this manual is provided without any
warranty, express or implied, as to its effect and completeness.
Such information and advice should be used as a guide and
Find your new best friend at
modified to meet the specific needs of your pet. Please use
the materials and information at your own risk, and only in
combination with professional advice. By receiving such
information and materials from Adopt-a-Pet.com, you agree
to bear all risk associated with the use of such information
and materials and agree to hold harmless Adopt-a-Pet.com,
its officers, directors, employees, volunteers, sponsors and
agents from all claims arising out of or related to your use
of, or inability to use, the information or materials received
from Adopt-a-Pet.com. Phew! Now we can say thank you for
adopting a new pet, and you can get back to the fun stuff!
© 2013 Adopt-a-Pet.com
